Add protomaps devblog (#1646)
helium/docs: devblog/2023-10-23-protomaps-migration.mdx

---
layout: post
title: Saving 💰 by Utilizing Free and Open Source World Maps
date: 2023-10-23
hide_table_of_contents: true
authors: [mbthiery]
---

At the end of September, the Helium Foundation changed our map tile server to Protomaps. As a
globally distributed network of physical infrastructure, maps are a critical piece of the
interpretation and visualization of the network. Helium runs many services leveraging maps,
including Explorer, which serves hundreds of thousands of users monthly. Through this refactor, we

> are on track to save tens of thousands of dollars a month.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are on track to save several thousands of dollars a month.
```
is more accurate

formats work.

```json
    sources: {
      protomaps: {
        type: "vector",
        tiles: [
          "pmtiles://http://127.0.0.1:8080/world.pmtiles/{z}/{x}/{y}.mvt",
        ],
      },
    },
—--
    sources: {
      protomaps: {
        type: "vector",
        url: "pmtiles://http://127.0.0.1:8080/world.pmtiles",
      },
    },
```

### Update Your Styling

Mapbox and Protomaps use two different sets of vector basemap layers. As such, if you are trying to
migrate from Mapbox to Protomaps, your existing Mapbox styles will not render anything. I'd
recommend you use or adapt one of the existing `protomaps-theme-base` layers as shown
[in the docs](https://protomaps.com/docs/frontends/maplibre#vector-basemaps). Alternatively, feel
free to use
[our modified layers](https://github.com/helium/network-explorer/blob/main/src/components/HotspotsMap/mapLayersDark.tsx)
(note that we have removed some layers that were not of interest to us).

## Conclusion

While we ran into a hiccup or two while completing the migration, we couldn’t be happier with the
end result of our migration to Protomaps. Since our migration, we have experienced equal or better

> performance for a fraction of the cost. In recognition of this our CEO Abhay, who happened to work
> with Brandon, the man behind protomaps, has decided to become a sponsor of the project. ts that
> great!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
performance for a fraction of the cost. We really appreciate the efforts of [@bdon][bdon] for this
really amazing solo open source project. If you start to use protomaps, we encourage you to
[support his work][sponsor] on Github!

[bdon]: https://github.com/bdon
[sponsor]: https://github.com/sponsors/protomaps
```
prefer not to call me out :)
